AD CLICK AGGREGATOR — MOCK INTERVIEW SCRIPT
============================================

這題的核心是「一次點擊只能算一次」，而且錢跟著這個數字走。
兩個寫入的先後順序會決定最壞情況是掉資料還是重複計，這是全題最值錢的一分鐘。
對白英文，場景標題跟導演註解（>）中文。


SCENE 0 — Opening
【現在在做：釐清這題要設計的是收集端還是查詢端，還是兩邊】
--------------------------------------------------------------

INTERVIEWER: Design an ad click aggregator. Users click ads, advertisers want to
see how their ads are doing. 45 minutes.

CANDIDATE: Two sides then — the part that catches clicks, and the part that
answers questions about them. Both?

INTERVIEWER: Both.

CANDIDATE: How fresh do the numbers need to be? An advertiser refreshes their
dashboard — are they looking at this minute, or this morning?

INTERVIEWER: As close to real time as you can make it.

CANDIDATE: And how fine-grained? Can they ask about a specific minute, or is
daily enough?

INTERVIEWER: Minute granularity.

CANDIDATE: Last one, and it's the one I care about most: if we lose a click, or
count one twice, how bad is that?

INTERVIEWER: Advertisers pay per click.

CANDIDATE: So both directions cost money. Losing clicks means we undercharge and
the advertiser's own numbers won't match ours. Counting twice means we overcharge,
which is worse — that's a billing dispute, and if it's systematic it's a lawsuit.

INTERVIEWER: Correct.

> 第三問把「準確」變成一個有方向的需求：掉資料跟重複計不是對稱的。後面的寫入
> 順序就是從這句話推出來的。沒問這題的人，到那一步只能憑感覺選。


SCENE 1 — Functional requirements
【現在在做：兩條，因為這題真的只有兩件事】
----------------------------------------------

CANDIDATE:

  1. A user clicks an ad and lands on the advertiser's site
  2. An advertiser queries click metrics over a time range, down to one minute

  Out of scope: ad targeting, ad serving, cross-device tracking, fraud detection

INTERVIEWER: Why is serving out of scope?

CANDIDATE: Because deciding which ad to show is a completely different system —
auctions, targeting, budget pacing. I'm treating it as a service that hands me an
ad with an identifier attached. What I own starts at the click.

> 兩條 FR 看起來很少，但這題就是這樣。硬湊到四條會把別題的需求拉進來。


SCENE 2 — Non-functional requirements
【現在在做：算量，順便發現這題的量其實不大，難的是別的】
------------------------------------------------------------

CANDIDATE: Scale?

INTERVIEWER: Ten million active ads.

CANDIDATE: Clicks per second is what matters. Let me guess and you correct me —
peak 10,000 clicks a second?

INTERVIEWER: That's the right order.

CANDIDATE: Then average is roughly a tenth of peak, so about 1,000 a second,
which is 86 million a day. Call it 100 million clicks a day.

Now — is 10,000 writes a second hard? Not really. That's well within one
well-configured database. So the difficulty here isn't throughput.

INTERVIEWER: Then what is it?

CANDIDATE: Three other things.

Exactly-once. Every one of those 100 million clicks maps to money, and neither
losing nor duplicating is acceptable.

The query shape. An advertiser asks "clicks per minute for this ad over the last
month" — that's 43,000 buckets aggregated from raw rows. Doing that scan at query
time on a transactional database, for every advertiser opening a dashboard, is
where it falls over. Not the writes.

And the skew. Ten million ads, but the traffic isn't spread across them. One
viral ad might be a large share of all clicks, and whatever key I shard on will
put all of that on one shard.

INTERVIEWER: Good. Those are the three.

> 這一段的價值在於他算完數字之後說「這個量不難」。多數候選人算出一萬就開始講
> 分片。承認瓶頸不在自己剛算的那個數字上，需要真的想過。

CANDIDATE:

  - Peak 10k clicks/sec, ~100M clicks/day
  - Advertiser queries return in under a second
  - No lost clicks, no double counting
  - Numbers as fresh as possible — target a minute or better
  - Traffic is heavily skewed toward a few hot ads


SCENE 3 — Entities and API
【現在在做：注意 impressionId 這個欄位，它是後面去重的整個基礎】
-------------------------------------------------------------------

CANDIDATE:

  Ad             adId, advertiserId, targetUrl
  Impression     impressionId, adId, userId, shownAt
  Click          impressionId, adId, userId, clickedAt
  Metrics        adId, minute, clickCount   (aggregated)

  POST /click    { adId, impressionId, signature }  -> 302 to targetUrl
  GET  /metrics?adId=&from=&to=&granularity=minute

INTERVIEWER: Why is there an Impression entity? The requirement was about clicks.

CANDIDATE: Because "the same click" needs a definition, and time plus user isn't
one. The same person can legitimately see and click the same ad twice in an
afternoon and both should count.

What can't happen twice is one particular showing of the ad being clicked twice.
So the ad serving system generates an id each time it renders an ad, and that id
comes back with the click. Two clicks carrying the same impression id are the
same click.

INTERVIEWER: What stops someone forging one?

CANDIDATE: Nothing, as it stands — the id is in the browser, anyone can send
whatever they like and inflate a competitor's spend or their own payout. So it
gets signed: the serving system computes an HMAC over the ad id and impression
id with a secret only the servers know, and sends the pair to the browser. The
click processor recomputes it and drops anything that doesn't match.

The browser can replay a valid pair, but it can't manufacture a new one. Replays
are what dedup handles.

> 面試官問「為什麼多一個 entity」，答案是「因為要先定義什麼叫同一次點擊」。
> 這跟 Uber 那題「為什麼 Fare 要獨立存」是同一種回答：理由來自產品語意，不是
> 資料庫正規化。


SCENE 4 — The dumb version
【現在在做：笨版本，然後用三個難點各戳一次】
-----------------------------------------------

CANDIDATE:

  Browser → Click Processor → Postgres (one row per click)
                            → 302 redirect

  GET /metrics → SELECT count(*) FROM clicks
                 WHERE adId = ? AND clickedAt BETWEEN ? AND ?
                 GROUP BY date_trunc('minute', clickedAt)

Correct, and it fails all three non-functional requirements.

The query scans raw rows every time. A month at minute granularity for a busy ad
is tens of millions of rows aggregated on demand, per dashboard load.

There's no dedup — a replayed impression id inserts a second row.

And a hot ad concentrates writes and reads on whatever partition holds it.

INTERVIEWER: Fix the query one.

CANDIDATE: Don't aggregate at read time. Aggregate as the clicks arrive and store
the result, so the dashboard reads pre-computed numbers.

That means clicks go into a stream, a stream processor keeps a running count per
ad per minute, and it writes those counts into a store built for aggregate
queries — a columnar OLAP database. The dashboard then reads a few thousand
pre-summed rows instead of scanning tens of millions.

  Browser → Click Processor → Kafka → Flink (1-minute windows) → OLAP DB
                            → 302                                   ↑
                                                          Advertiser dashboard

> 這一步的順序很重要：先說「不要在讀的時候聚合」，再說出 Kafka 跟 Flink。倒過來
> 講就變成報工具名。


SCENE 5 — The write order
【現在在做：全題最值錢的一分鐘。兩個寫入誰先誰後】
-----------------------------------------------------

INTERVIEWER: How do you dedup?

CANDIDATE: Keep the impression ids we've already seen, in Redis. A click comes
in, check if the id is there — if yes, drop it; if no, record it and process the
click.

INTERVIEWER: Write it as steps.

CANDIDATE: Two writes involved. Adding the id to the cache, and putting the event
on Kafka. So:

  Option A:  add to cache  →  write to Kafka
  Option B:  write to Kafka  →  add to cache

Let me think about A. Cache write succeeds, then the process dies before Kafka.
That click is gone — and it's permanently gone, because if the browser retries,
the cache now says "seen this one" and we drop it. We deleted the evidence and
then refused to accept it again.

B: Kafka write succeeds, process dies before the cache write. The click is safely
in the stream. If the browser retries, the cache doesn't know about it, so we
write it to Kafka a second time. Now it's counted twice.

So A loses clicks permanently, B counts some twice. Neither is clean, but a
duplicate is a number I can find and correct later. A missing click leaves no
trace anywhere.

B. Kafka first, cache second.

INTERVIEWER: How do you correct the duplicates?

CANDIDATE: A second path. Raw events also land in object storage — S3 — and once
a day a batch job reads that raw log, computes the true counts, and compares them
against what the stream processor wrote. Where they differ, the batch number
wins.

The stream gives fresh numbers that are approximately right. The batch gives
correct numbers a day late. Billing runs off the corrected ones; the dashboard
shows the fresh ones.

INTERVIEWER: And the advertiser sees the number change?

CANDIDATE: Yes, and they need to be told which is which. A number labelled "last
24 hours, preliminary" that later settles is honest. The same number shown as
final and then quietly changing is how you lose an advertiser's trust in every
number you show them.

> 這一整段是這題的核心，注意它的形狀：不是「用 Redis 去重」，是把兩個順序各推
> 一次，各自算出最壞情況，然後說明為什麼其中一種壞得比較能救。最後那句「要標
> 示成暫定值」把技術決定接回產品，那是額外的分。


SCENE 6 — The hot ad
【現在在做：處理傾斜。分片鍵加隨機後綴，聚合前再拿掉】
---------------------------------------------------------

INTERVIEWER: One ad is 30% of all clicks. What happens?

CANDIDATE: If Kafka is partitioned by ad id, that ad's events all go to one
partition, and one partition is handled by one consumer. Kinesis caps a shard at
about 1MB/s or 1,000 records a second, and Kafka partitions have a practical
ceiling too. That one partition backs up while the others idle.

The fix is to stop that ad from being a single key. Append a random suffix:

  adId              →  adId:0, adId:1, ... adId:9

Now those events spread across ten partitions and ten consumers. The stream
processor strips the suffix before aggregating, so the counts sum back together
correctly — addition doesn't care which order the parts arrived in.

INTERVIEWER: Do you do that for every ad?

CANDIDATE: No. Ten million ads times ten suffixes is ten million extra keys for
ads that get four clicks a day, and it makes the aggregation state ten times
bigger for no reason.

Only high-volume ads get split, and which ones those are is knowable ahead of
time — the ad system already knows a campaign's budget and expected volume. Where
that fails I'd want a feedback path: monitor partition lag, and when one shard
runs hot, promote that ad into the split set.

> 「只對熱門的做」加上「怎麼知道哪些是熱門的」，這第二句是多數人漏掉的。分片
> 加後綴很多人會講，講得出啟用條件的少。


SCENE 7 — Frontend lens
【現在在做：儀表板這一端。粒度是前端的責任，那句是重點】
------------------------------------------------------------

CANDIDATE: The dashboard has decisions the backend can't make.

Granularity is the client's job. A day at minute granularity is 1,440 points,
which a chart can draw. A year at minute granularity is 525,000 points — the
request is huge, the parse is slow, and the screen is 1,500 pixels wide so 99% of
those points can't be seen anyway. So the range picker chooses the granularity:
a day gets minutes, a month gets hours, a year gets days. The user can override
it, but the default should never let them ask for something the browser can't
draw.

State split. The query result is server state, keyed by ad, range, and
granularity — that triple is the cache key, and it's also the URL. A dashboard
exists to be sent to a colleague, so the ad, the range and the granularity all
belong in the address bar. Which point the cursor is hovering and which series
are toggled off stay local.

Updates: poll, don't stream. The data is aggregated per minute; opening a
persistent connection to deliver something that changes once a minute is
machinery for nothing. Poll every 30 seconds, and stop when the tab is
backgrounded — a dashboard left open on a second monitor overnight shouldn't
keep asking.

Rendering: past a thousand points, canvas rather than SVG. Every SVG point is a
DOM node, and panning a chart with 50,000 nodes stutters. And panning or zooming
should redraw from data already in memory, not refetch.

Accessibility, which for a chart is usually done badly. A table of the same
numbers underneath — not hidden away as an alternative, present as equal content,
because it's often easier to read for everyone. A one-line text summary per
series: total, peak, and when the peak was, so a screen reader user gets the
shape without walking 1,440 cells. And colour can't be the only difference
between two lines — line style has to differ too, for the same reason.

INTERVIEWER: The granularity point is one most people miss.

> 「粒度是前端的責任」是這一題的前端亮點：它是一個前端做的、直接改變後端負載
> 的決定。一年 52 萬個點那個數字讓它變得具體。


SCENE 8 — Wrapping up
【現在在做：三個沒展開的】
-----------------------------

INTERVIEWER: What did we skip?

CANDIDATE: Three.

Fraud. Everything I built counts clicks accurately, including the fake ones. A
click farm produces perfectly valid signed impressions. Detecting that is a
separate system and it would sit between the stream and the billing numbers.

Late events. A phone that clicks while offline and syncs an hour later arrives
after its minute window closed. Flink handles that with watermarks and allowed
lateness, but somebody has to decide how late is too late, and that's a business
answer, not a technical one.

Retention and cost. 100 million events a day in raw form adds up quickly. The
aggregates are small and can live for years; the raw events probably age out
after a few months, which means the reconciliation path has a horizon.

INTERVIEWER: Good. That's time.


四題對照
==========

                    FB Live       Uber          Tinder        Ad Click
------------        ----------    ----------    ----------    ------------
瓶頸                出口頻寬      寫入次數      多維過濾      查詢時的聚合
量的大小            很大          很大          很大          其實不大
真正的難點          扇出          競爭          競態          恰好一次
一致性              AP + 例外     AP + CP 核心  AP + CP 配對  最終正確，先給暫定值
搶救錯誤的方式      沒有          鎖過期        partition     每日對帳批次

前三題是「怎麼把量做出來」，這題是「怎麼讓數字對得起錢」。
量算完發現不大的時候，難點通常在別的地方，那一句要講出來。
